# Multi-Omics Assessment of Organoid Communication in a Six-Tissue Microphysiological System (MPS)

This repository contains code used to conduct the analyses associated with the manuscript *"Inter-tissue communication shapes human metabolic tissue states and resolves anti-diabetic drug response modes in a six-tissue microphysiological system"*, currently available as a preprint [bioRxiv](https://www.biorxiv.org/).

The data to replicate this study's result is available at the following repositories:
- Bulk RNAseq .fastq files: SRA accessions [BioProject...](SRA)
- Bulk RNAseq gene expression matrices: GEO accession [GSE...](GEO)
- Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS) mzXML files: Metabolights accession [MTBLS...](Metabolights)
- LC-MS raw and transformed peak intensity matrices: Metabolights accession [MTBLS...](Metabolights)

## Bulk RNAseq Data Processing
The .fastq files from Illumina outputs were processed using the [nf-core/rnaseq pipeline v3.19](https://nf-co.re/rnaseq/). The pipeline was executed on the Johns Hopkins University DISCOVERY HPC using SLURM (see `coculture_tissues_rnaseq` folder). Multiple R (v4.4.2) packages were used to analyze the gene expression matrices generated by nf-core/rnaseq Salmon quantitation, including tximport and DESeq2 (v1.46).

### `coculture_tissues_rnaseq`
The `coculture_tissues_rnaseq` folder contains code to run the analyses pertaining to the RNAseq data.
- The `coculture_tissues_rnaseq/nfcore_rnaseq_run` folder contains the `run_nfcore_rnaseq.sh` file, a SLURM script to execute the nf-core/rnaseq pipeline starting from .fastq files. The reference human genome was obtained from [NCBI - GCF_000001405.40](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/datasets/genome/GCF_000001405.40/)
- The `coculture_tissues_rnaseq/data` folder contains the sample sheet (`coculture_rnaseq_nfcore_samplesheet.csv`) used as input for the nfcore/rnaseq pipeline. A sample metadata file (`RNA_SampleList.xlsx`) is also available.
- `coculture_tissues_rnaseq/code` folder contains a pipeline in the form of a series of R scripts, which were executed in the order indicated by their file names (`step1_*`, `step2_*`, ...). The pipeline begins with processing of Salmon quantifications (nfcore/rnaseq pipeline) and creation of a DESeq object for downstream analyses. Next, filtering of low-expression genes was performed and batch correction via surrogate variable analysis (SVA). Finally, differential gene expression tests were conducted and corresponding Gene Set Enrichment Analyses (GSEA).

## Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS) Data Processing
The mzXML files containing the spectra were exported to a peak intensity matrix and annotated by the Proteomics and Metabolomics Core Facility at the H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center (Tampa, FL, USA). The peak intensity matrix was read into R for filtering, batch effect correction, and differential abundance testing.

### `coculture_supernatant_metabolomics`
The `coculture_supernatant_metabolomics` folder contains code to run the analyses pertaining to the LC-MS data. The pipeline expects that the un-transformed peak intensity matrices (positive and negative channels), as well as a the sample metadata .csv file are available within the `coculture_supernatant_metabolomics/data` folder. Both can be obtained from Metabolights.
- The `coculture_supernatant_metabolomics/code` folder contains a pipeline in the form of a series of R scripts, which were executed in the order indicated by their file names (`step1_*`, `step2_*`, ...). The pipeline begins with processing of the exported peak intensity matrix, filtering of low intensity peaks, and median intensity transformation. The pipeline continues with batch effect assessment and completes with differential abundance testing via T-test and Wilcoxon's Rank-Sum testing.

### `manuscript_figures`
The `manuscript_figures_tables` contains a series of R scripts that consume outputs from the previous two pipelines and reproduces figures presented in the manuscript.
- The `manuscript_figures_tables/code` includes scripts top generate the figures indicated in their filenames. There is also a script `color_palettes.R` with the color palettes used in the study.
- The `manuscript_figures_tables/data` contains .xlsx files with gene set names that are highlighted through the manuscript, and are used during figure generation.

*Code generated by Oscar Ospina (2025 - 2026).*
